add usaco-1181 solution (#2689)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/usaco-1181.mdx

---
id: usaco-1181
source: USACO Bronze 2022 January
title: Drought
author: Chongtian Ma
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](http://www.usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob3_bronze_jan22.html)

## Explanation

We can solve this problem greedily using one linear sweep and making prefixes of cows have equal hunger as we sweep from left to right. Thus, we can break this
problem up into cases:

> Suppose we are currently looking at cow $i$, and cow $i+1$ has a greater hunger value - then it is sufficient to decrease cow $i+1$ to the same hunger

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we are currently looking at cow $i$, and cow $i+1$ has a greater hunger value - then it is sufficient to decrease cow $i+1$ to the same hunger value
```

> as cow $i$. To do this we will pick cows the pair of cows $i+1$ and $i+2$ and decrease their hungers until cow $i+1$ has the same hunger value of cow $i$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as cow $i$. To do this we will pick the pair of cows $i+1$ and $i+2$ and decrease their hungers until cow $i+1$ has the same hunger value as cow $i$.
```

> Of course if cow $i+2$ has a negative hunger value, then it is impossible and we output -1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, if cow $i+2$ has a negative hunger value, then it is impossible and we output $-1$.
```

Now suppose cow $i$ has a greater hunger value than cow $i+1$, we obviously cannot decrease the hunger for cow $i+1$ any further since it will never be
equal - we only can decrease the hunger for all the cows before $i+1$. To do this we select adjacent pairs of cows starting with the odd numbered cows and

> have their hunger decreased together (cow 1 and 2 get their, cow 3 and 4 ... cow $i-1$ and cow $i$). After this, all the cows before $i+1$ will be decreased to the same hunger value as cow $i+1$. However, there is the case where $i$ is odd, in which it is impossible to decrease unless we also decrease the hunger value for cow $i+1$, so we output -1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decrease their hunger values together (cows $1$ and $2$, cows $3$ and $4$, $\ldots$, cows $i-1$ and $i$). After this, all the cows before $i+1$ will be decreased to the same hunger value as cow $i+1$. However, when $i$ is odd, it is impossible to decrease it's hunger unless we also decrease the hunger value for cow $i+1$, so we output $-1$.
```

> Note that at every step we are always making sure cows from 1 to $i+1$ have the same hunger values. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that at every step we are always making sure cows from $1$ to $i+1$ have the same hunger values. 
```

## Implementation

Time Complexity: $\mathcal{O}(N)$

<LanguageSection>
  
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
using ll = long long;

> void solve(){

Reviewer: not necessary tbh

> void solve(){

Reviewer: usaco solutions use solve() all the time so i dont see why this is an issue.

> void solve(){

Reviewer 2: usaco solutions also use benq templates

> void solve(){

Reviewer: > usaco solutions also use benq templates

http://usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob3_bronze_dec21.html

This is not a Benq solution.

> void solve(){

Reviewer 2: ok but just because usaco does it doesn't mean we should emulate them is what i'm saying

> void solve(){

Reviewer: > ok but just because usaco does it doesn't mean we should emulate them is what i'm saying

why not😛? why is this something necessary?

> void solve(){

Reviewer 2: yknow what, fine
leave it as is

	int n;
	cin >> n;
	vector<ll> hunger(n+1); // hunger for each cow, one indexed
	for(int i = 1; i <= n; i++){
		cin >> hunger[i];
	}

	ll bags_needed = 0;
	for(int i = 1; i < n; i++){
		if(hunger[i+1] > hunger[i]){
			// if the i+1'th cow has more hunger than cow i
			if(i + 2 > n){
				// if the i+2'th cow doesn't exist, then we can't
				// possibly decrease the pair of cows starting with i+1.
				cout<<-1<<"\n";
				return;
			}
			ll difference = hunger[i+1] - hunger[i];
			hunger[i+1] -= difference;
			hunger[i+2] -= difference;
			if(hunger[i+2] < 0){
				// cow i+2 can't possibly have negative hunger value
				cout<<-1<<"\n";
				return;
			}
			// it takes difference * 2 bags to feed cows i+1 and i+2 to equal hunger as i
			bags_needed += difference * 2;

		}
		else if(hunger[i] > hunger[i+1]){
			// if the i'th cow has more hunger than the i+1'th cow
			if(i % 2 == 1){
				// if i is an odd index then it is impossible.
				cout<<-1<<"\n";
				return;
			}
			ll difference = hunger[i] - hunger[i+1];
			// it takes difference * i bags to feed every cow from 1 to i to the same
			// hunger value as cow i+1
			bags_needed += difference * i;
		}
	}

> 	cout<<bags_needed<<"\n";

Reviewer 2: if you're gonna resolve this at least give a reason

> 	cout<<bags_needed<<"\n";

Author: because endl isnt necessary?

> 	cout<<bags_needed<<"\n";

Reviewer 2: fair enough

---
id: usaco-1181
source: USACO Bronze 2022 January
title: Drought
author: Chongtian Ma
---

[Official Analysis (C++)](http://www.usaco.org/current/data/sol_prob3_bronze_jan22.html)

## Explanation

> We can solve this problem greedily using one linear sweep and making prefixes of cows have equal hunger as we sweep from left to right. Thus, we can break this

Reviewer 2: i don't think the bronze ppl would know half of what this means

Author: i changed the word "sweep" to "loop", is it better now lol?

Reviewer 2: hm
how about
"Let's go through the cows from left to right, making sure that all the cows we've processed have the same hunger level."

Author: yeah that's better, thanks.

problem up into cases:

> Suppose the cows are numbered from $1$ to $n$, and we are currently looking at cow $i$. If cow $i+1$ has a greater hunger value, then it is sufficient to decrease cow $i+1$ to the same hunger valueas cow $i$. To do this we will pick the pair of cows $i+1$ and $i+2$ and decrease their hungers until cow $i+1$ has the same hunger value as cow $i$. Of course, if cow $i+2$ has a negative hunger value, then it is impossible and we output $-1$.

Reviewer 2: 1. what does "sufficient" mean?
2. wdym by "negative hunger value"? aren't the given hunger values positive?

Reviewer: 1. what doesn't make sense here
2. read the problem

Author: 1. sufficient means just enough
2. you dont want to subtract the hunger into negative. i changed the wording here alittle.

Reviewer 2: > 1. what doesn't make sense here
> 2. read the problem

not helpful jesse

Now suppose cow $i$ has a greater hunger value than cow $i+1$. We obviously cannot decrease the hunger for cow $i+1$ any further since it will never be
equal - we only can decrease the hunger for all the cows before $i+1$. To do this we select adjacent pairs of cows starting with the odd numbered cows and

> decrease their hunger values together (cows $1$ and $2$, cows $3$ and $4$, $\ldots$, cows $i-1$ and $i$). After this, all the cows before $i+1$ will be decreased to the same hunger value as cow $i+1$. However, when $i$ is odd, it is impossible to decrease it's hunger unless we also decrease the hunger value for cow $i+1$, so we output $-1$.

Reviewer 2: this giant wall of text is very intimidating- perhaps walk the reader through with an example

Author: what do you mean? am i supposed to walk them through a sample case?

Reviewer 2: just like
```
5 5 5 3 2
```
let's say we were at the last 5
[explanation follows]

Author: is it necessary? i don't see other bronze explanations do it.

Author: does drawings of how the steps work suffice?

Author: actually yeah, i can do that with a drawing

Author: @SansPapyrus683 is this fine?
https://cdn.discordapp.com/attachments/932459332946264144/963998668921389066/Screen_Shot_2022-04-13_at_11.06.10_PM.png
If so, how do I embed images in mdx?

Reviewer 2: i'd prefer you do it with some ascii stuff
for example
```
5 5 5 5 3 2
4 4 4 4 3 2
3 3 3 3 3 2
```

Author: ive done it, but i dont know how to do the fancy mdx ascii formatting. could you fix it?

> Note that at every step we are always making sure cows from $1$ to $i+1$ have the same hunger values. 

Reviewer 2: put this at the beginning lmao

Author: the beginning already says it

Reviewer 2: then... why say this again

Author: reiterating and making what i said before in more detail now that they know what the approach is, is it necessary to remove?

Reviewer 2: yeah delete this line

as cow $i$. To do this we will pick the pair of cows $i+1$ and $i+2$ and decrease their hungers until cow $i+1$ has the same hunger value as cow $i$.
Of course, if cow $i+2$ has a negative hunger value, then it is impossible and we output $-1$.

Now suppose cow $i$ has a greater hunger value than cow $i+1$, we obviously cannot decrease the hunger for cow $i+1$ any further since it will never be
equal - we only can decrease the hunger for all the cows before $i+1$. To do this we select adjacent pairs of cows starting with the odd numbered cows and
decrease their hunger values together (cows $1$ and $2$, cows $3$ and $4$, $\ldots$, cows $i-1$ and $i$). After this, all the cows before $i+1$ will be decreased to the same hunger value as cow $i+1$. However, when $i$ is odd, it is impossible to decrease it's hunger unless we also decrease the hunger value for cow $i+1$, so we output $-1$.

Note that at every step we are always making sure cows from $1$ to $i+1$ have the same hunger values. 

## Implementation

Time Complexity: $\mathcal{O}(N)$

<LanguageSection>
  
<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;
using ll = long long;

void solve(){
	int n;
	cin >> n;

> 	vector<ll> hunger(n + 1);  // hunger for each cow, (1-indexed)

Reviewer 2: where? you only talk about cows i, i + 1, and i + 2?

> 	vector<ll> hunger(n + 1);  // hunger for each cow, (1-indexed)

Author: for the -1 case i > i+1 case it matters, also it makes adding the bags_needed there much cleaner

> 	vector<ll> hunger(n + 1);  // hunger for each cow, (1-indexed)

Reviewer 2: how would that matter?
also i looked @ your code, nowhere do you reference `i - 1` or `i - [any number]` for that matter

> 	vector<ll> hunger(n + 1);  // hunger for each cow, (1-indexed)

Author: in my explanation i mentioned:
"However, when $i$ is odd, it is impossible to decrease it's hunger unless we also decrease the hunger value for cow $i+1$, so we output $-1$"
It also fits in with the example I gave.
I believe changing it to one indexed will only make that part nastier.

> 	vector<ll> hunger(n + 1);  // hunger for each cow, (1-indexed)

Author: if it is zero indexed then i would need to do
bags_needed += difference * (i+1);
which would only confuse people more

> 	vector<ll> hunger(n + 1);  // hunger for each cow, (1-indexed)

Reviewer 2: ok
then you should definitely mention that we number the cows from 1 to N
i went into the editorial thinking that the cows were an array

> 	vector<ll> hunger(n + 1);  // hunger for each cow, (1-indexed)

Author: done, added the mention
